So, some 300 years ago, philosophers in Europe instigated a programme for universal human improvement
that came to be known as the Enlightenment, and they were the designers of their day,
and their programme amounted to a massive vote of confidence in the power of reason,
which is thought to have been uniquely bestowed on humankind by its creator,
to emancipate human beings from their ties to the earth that hold all other creatures captive,
and to raise them to the heights of civilisation.
And over the ensuing centuries, developments in education, governance, technoscience and medicine
underpinned by this Enlightenment philosophy would gather pace and spread around the globe
with trade and colonisation, and they would go on to transform the lives of millions of people.
Now, I don't think we can deny the contribution of Enlightenment humanism to the common good,
and yet this has come at a cost in two respects.
First, in driving a wedge between humanity and nature, the very earth that had once offered
nourishment and support for human life has come to be seen as a repository or store of resources
to be plundered, unloosing an unfettered extraction of materials on an industrial scale,
which has ravaged the earth and jeopardised its capacity for renewal.
And second, while the appeal to universal human entitlement serves well the interests of those with the power to lay claim to it,
for others the forcible imposition of this claim has meant dehumanisation and enslavement,
along with the loss of land, livelihood and even life.
Now, as these twin costs have inexorably risen, what began as an agenda for progressive emancipation
has morphed into a vicious spiral of environmental destruction and social injustice.
So newer pathologies of humanism, such as corporate neoliberalism and algorithmic surveillance,
are only exacerbating the situation, and we already see the results in the form of climatic breakdown,
pandemic disease and cyber warfare.
So I think we currently stand at a conjuncture no less momentous
than that which faced our enlightenment forebears of three centuries ago.
So do we have the courage, as they did, to usher in a new settlement
that our own descendants, another 300 years from now, will look back upon as equally foundational?
And if so, what form should it take?
